##Historic and projected climate change in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem

###Introduction
With each passing year, the world has become more aware of the impacts of climate change. Evidence of the Earth's shifting climate patterns has become more perceptible from sea and surface temperature monitoring, satellite technology, and improve climate modeling.  At a relevant human scale, these changes are noted by recent hurricane events, glacial retreat, and droughts at new unprecedented frequencies and magnitudes that have begun to reshape the landscapes. Within the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem (GYE), regional managers and citizens have experienced major disturbance  events that change the systems ecology through increased mountain pine  beetle attacks, wildfire events, and reduced annual snow pack. With both the fifth annual Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change report (IPCC) and the latest US National Climate Assessment (NCA) reporting a decadal increases of gloabal temperatures at 1-1.2ºF _(0.56-0.67ºC)_ and a continuing upwards trend, this begs the questions:

1. How has climate changed within the GYE?
2. How might disturbance events link to changes in climate?  
3. How is climate predicted to change in the future?

###History of Greater Yellowstone Climate 
From paleoclimate records of the GYE, changing climate in general is not unusal. The last major warm period occured during the Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene (12,000-8,000 years ago), when the world saw the end of the last glacial maximum. The first major vegetation to move in was Engelmenn spruce, later followed by sub-alpine fir and whitebark pine, creating a widespread subalpine forest across the region. As conditions grew warmer and the glaciers reached their minimum (9,500-7,500 years ago) the region became was characterized by drier and warmer conditions that were XX ºF _(ºC)_hotter and XX in _(mm)_ of precipitation drier.  At this period lodgepole pine and Douglas fir moved in from the more Southern landscapes, pushing the sub-alpine speces to higher elevations (Whitlock and Bartlein). Around 5000 years ago, the temperatures dropped and precipitation increased, converging towards the climate we recognize the GYE as having today.

###Recent climate within GYE (How has climate changes within the GYE?)
The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem is a complex and facisnating region to study climate. The region is the home of some of the longest records of temperature and precipitation change anywhere in the US, with XX weather stations running since 18XX. Due to the complex mountain topography and steep elevational gradients, weather is highly heterogeneous across the region allowing events where specific mountain ranges can encounter 50mm of snowfall while another experiences 75ºF clear skies. Interest in snow science and variability across these mountain landscapes has led to more than XX SnoTEL stations across XX GYE region. This provides local scientists with some of the highest density records of long term weather data of anywhere in the US. 

We draw on a data set called the Parameter-elevation Relationships on Independent Slopes Model or PRISM (Daly 2002) to characterize past climate for the GYE. PRISM uses data from meteorological stations as input and interpolates between these stations based on topography and other factors and is often used as a standard gridded climate model for historic climate analysis at a regional scale. Since the 1900, mean annual temperatures within the GYE record at 39.2ºF _(4ºC)_ with an annual precipitation of 20.1in/year _(510mm/year)_. Current trends indication that the annual temperatures have increased by 1.1ºF/century _(0.61ºC/cty)_, echoing the temperature changes seen globally. Mean annual minimum temperatures, which indicate the coldest annual conditions, have increased more rapidly (1.5ºF/century) _(0.83ºC/cty)_ than the mean annual maximum temperatures (0.7ºF/century), which indicate the warmest daytime conditions. 

The GYE is subject to multiple-year periods of warmer and dryer conditions versus cooler and dryer periods. These cycles have been associated with a natural ocean dynamic termed Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), which has been in place for centuries. Human-induced climatic warming is thought to be occurring on top of the PDO cycles, accounting for the increasing temperature trend since 1900. The observed rate of temerature increase have been particularly pronounced since 1980. In fact, the rise in minimum temperatures in the last decade exceeds those of the 1930s Dust Bowl Era; although mean annual maximum temperatures ($T_{max}$) have not exceeded the historically recorded highs. This suggests that the major temperature changes that have occurred are primarily due to minimum temperature ($T_{min}$) rises. One manifestation of change in minimum temperatures is less extreme winter cold periods. Very cold winter monthly temperatures (<0°F) occurred about every six years prior to 1993, and have not occurred since then. 

Changes in temperature vary seasonally. $T_{min}$ increased in all seasons, most rapidly in summer and spring, and less rapidly in the fall. $T_{max}$ increased most rapidly in winter and spring, but experienced little change in fall. Precipitation has increased slightly since 1900 with a 0.36 in/century _(9.3 mm/cty)_ increase. Drier-than-average years predominated prior to about 1940, and wetter-than-average years since then; however, these changes in precipitation are very small relative to the long-term average of about 20.1 in/year _(51mm/year)_. These annual low precipitation patterns have manifested in the past 30 years in greater frequency with three extreme low precipitation events (-100mm/year below long term average) that have consequence for vegetation stress within the landscape.

The effect of precipitation on water availability is balanced by loss of moisture from evaporation and transpiration. The ratio of loss to potential evapotranspiration (PET) to the input from precipitation is a measure of aridity of the system. A plot of the aridity index for the GYE reveals that
aridity declined during the period between 1900 and 1977 and then began to increase. This suggests that in the last twenty five years, increases in precipitation have not be adequate to offset increases in PET that resulted from increases in temperature, and has resulted in the ecosystem becoming slightly more arid since 1977. The significant increase in minimum temperatures in the recent decades has also had an observable impact on snowpack. A reconstruction of April 1 snow water equivalent (SWE) for the period 1200-2000 (Pederson et al. 2011) found that current SWE across the GYE is ~20% lower than the long-term average; and the century between 1900 and 2000 is the longest period of below-average snowpack in the past 800 years. During the past century, snowpack was particularly low during the 1930s and 1990s.

Changes in temperature over the past century have also influenced stream flow and temperature. Stream discharge has declined during 1950-2010 in 89% of streams analyzed in the Central Rocky Mountains, including those in the GYE (Leppi et al. 2012). Reduced flows were most pronounced during the summer months, as illustrated by data from the Yellowstone River. Stream temperature across the range of the Yellowstone cutthroat trout, which includes the GYE, have warmed by 1.8ºF _(1ºC)_ over the past century (Al-Chokhachy et al. 2013). Stream warming during the decade of the 2000s exceeded that of the Great Dustbowl of the 1930s and represents the greatest rate of change over the past century.

### Climate change relevance to disturbance (How might disturbance events link to changes in climate?)
The major changes in climate across the GYE since 1900 are a substantial increase in temperature, especially annual minimum temperatures in spring and summer, and a number of low precipitation events. An important consequence of this warming has been a reduction in spring snowpack, with April 1 SWE during the 1990s the lowest in 800 years. This reduced snowpack has resulted in lower soil moisture in uplands, warmer stream temperatures, and reduced stream runoff, especially in summer. One consequence of warming during the winter and spring months and seasonally high summer aridity has been an outbreak of forest pests and forest die-off. Mild winter temperatures in alpine regions have been found to directly relate to the survivorship of overwintering broods of mountain pine beetle, the major disturbance agent acting on whitebark pine species (Logan et al. 2010, Logan and Powell 2009). Arid summers (high temperatures, low precipitation) likely provide a compounding effect of increasing pine beetle development rates and increasing resource stress on white bark pine. This reduction in mortality of overwintering broods, increased development rates, and reduced tree defense can result in an expansion of the dispersal and colonization effectiveness of insect pests. Since 1999, an eruption of mountain pine beetle events has been observed that exceeds the frequencies, impacts, and ranges documented during the last 125 years (Raffa et al. 2008, Macfarlane et al. 2013). Aerial assessment of whitebark pine species populations within the GYE has indicated a 79% mortality rate of mature trees. These dramatic changes may be the first indicators of  how sensitive the vegetation communities in the GYE are to shift due to changed climate patterns.

### Projected climate of GYE (How is climate predicted to change in the future?)
Projections?, emission scenarios?, GCMs? Climate science is littered with acronyms, models, and jargon that is often intimidating to most scientists outside of the field, and even more foreign to the public. General circulation models (GCM), as known as global climate models, have been in development since the mid-1950's. Originally produced to computationally investigate weather patterns, rapid advances in computing allowed complete physics based modeling of atmospheric patterns on Earth. As computer processing speeds increased, higher modeling resolution and increased levels of complexity were built upon these models towards the levels of sophistication that they are today. However, despite the differences of past and present GCM complexity they all model the same underlying general principles of motion and laws of thermodynamics that have been understood for centuries. Currently, climate models simulate not only the atmosphere but also surface and deep ocean dynamics. When the modeled ocean and atmosphere are linked together, we refer to the GCM as 'coupled', which result in a more realistic simulation of our planet's climate. Determination of 'realism' for GCMs tend to be quantified in their ability to accurately predict the movement and evolution of disturbances such as frontal systems and tropical cyclones. Common recognizable metrics may include the ability to detect the El Nino Southern Oscillations. 

In 2013, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released the most recent projections of future climate under scenarios of greenhouse gas emissions (CMIP5; IPCCWGI ARG 2013). Some 46 global climate models were used to project climate under four representative concentration pathways (RCPs). RCPs are designed to characterize feasible alternative futures of the climate considering physical, demographic, economic, and social changes to the environment and atmosphere. Here we report results for  RCP 4.5, which assumes stabilization in atmospheric CO2 concentration at 560 ppm by 2100; RCP 6.0, which models a rise of CO2 concentration to 740 ppm by 2100; and RCP 8.5, which assumes increases in atmospheric CO2 concentration  to 1370 ppm by 2100. Actual measured rates of greenhouse gas emissions since 2000 have been consistent with the RCP 8.5 scenario (Rogelj et al. 2012, Diffenbaugh and Field 2013). Thrasher et al. (2013) downscaled these general circulation model (GCM) outputs to an 800-m grain size and we present the average projections (termed “ensemble average” or ea) of the GCMs. Additionally, we report projections of ecosystem processes under future climate and land use, which were derived from the NASA Terrestrial Observation and Prediction System (Nemani et al. 2009). These predictions were done within the GYE Protected Area Centered Ecosystem (PACE) (Hansen et al. 2011), which is somewhat smaller in area than the traditional GYE boundary.

Within the GYE PACE, mean annual temperature is projected to rise under each of the climate scenarios. By 2100, temperature is projected to increase from 3.0ºC (RCP 4.5) to 7.0ºC (RCP 8.5) above the average for the reference period of 1980-2005. Mean annual precipitation is projected to increase by 55 to 125 mm by 2100. While temperature is projected to rise at similar rates across seasons, precipitation increases most rapidly in spring and decrease slightly in summer. Aridity index is projected to increase moderately under RCP 4.5 and more substantially under RCP 8.5.